The element Vanadium (V) appears unique among alloying elements for providing high strengthening in
both the fcc Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni-V and bcc Cr-Mo-Nb-Ta-V-W-Hf-Ti-Zr high-entropy alloy families. The origin of
Vanadium’s special role is its atomic volume: large in the fcc alloys and small in the bcc alloys, and thus hav-
ing a large misfit volume in both crystalline structures. A parameter-free theory applicable to both fcc and
bec HEAs rationalizes this finding, with predictions of strength across a range of fcc and bcc alloys in quanti-
tative and qualitative agreement with experiments. In the fcc class, the analysis demonstrates why the


y newly-discovered NiCoV and Niop,¢32Vo.36g alloys have far higher strength than any other fcc alloy and are pre-
High-entropy alloys . : . : eye
Vanadium dicted to be the highest attainable. In the bcc class, the analysis demonstrates that the addition of V always
Solute strengthening theory increases the strength relative to the same alloys without V. The optimization of complex alloys for
Yield strength high strength should thus center around the inclusion of V as a primary element at concentration levels of

around 25 at.%

© 2020 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

 

1. Introduction

High-entropy alloys (HEAs) are multicomponent alloys with high
concentrations of all alloying elements. Alloys within this new class of
structural metal alloys demonstrate impressive combinations of prop-
erties such as high strength and high fracture toughness [1—4]. These
attractive properties have driven an intense search for new alloys
across the full range of number of components and composition.
Designing new alloys or rationalizing alloy performance has, however,
frequently relied on imprecise and non-quantitative concepts or corre-
lations, such as “lattice distortions” |5—8], electronegativity differences
[9] and others [10]. With a vast composition space available for alloy
design, physically-based and quantitatively-predictive theories are
needed to guide the search for better-performing alloys while under-
standing the limits of performance. In fact, such theories have recently
been developed for predicting alloy yield strength [11,12] and
have been shown to predict experiments across a range of HEA sys-
tems. The success of these theories indicates that the solute misfit vol-
umes are the dominant factor in strengthening. This insight points
toward new promising alloy compositions in different alloy
classes |12—14]. Theoretical results to date are on only a narrow range
of alloys, and no fcc alloys containing Vanadium (V) have been studied.

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: binglun.yin@epfl.ch (B. Yin).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2020.01.062
1359-6454/© 2020 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

However, experimentally, alloys containing the element V provide the
highest strengthening in both fcc and bcc alloys.

The primary experimental evidence for the role of V is revealed by
examining two alloy families. In the fcc family of Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni-V,
the medium-entropy alloy NiCoV [5] and the binary alloy
Nip.632Vo,.368 [9| have recently been reported to have very high room
temperature strengths as compared to all other alloys in this family.
In the bcc refractory alloy family Mo-Nb-Ta-V-W, the MoNbTaVW
has the highest retained strength at very high temperatures
(T > 1500 K) [15,16]. The fundamental origins of these extreme prop-
erties and their connections to the alloy composition were not previ-
ously established nor was the role of V as the critical element in both
fcc and bcc recognized. Here, application of the new mechanistic
models [11,12] for strengthening in fcc and bcc HEAs explains the ori-
gin of V’s potency for strengthening in HEAs. In particular, we make
new quantitative predictions for the NiCoV and Nig.¢32Vo.36s fcc alloys
in good agreement with experiments. These findings point toward
future development of V-containing alloys as most promising for cre-
ating high strengths in both fcc and bcc alloys.

High strength is not the sole requirement in alloy design. The high
strength may compromise ductility, for instance. For V, the low melt-
ing point of Vanadium oxide may limit the application of V-contain-
ing alloys to non-oxidizing situations. However, these issues may
also be overcome by tuning of other alloying elements or by engi-
neering mitigation strategies such as protective coatings, enabling
the exploitation of the high strength provided by V-containing alloys.
B. Yin et al. / Acta Materialia 188 (2020) 486—491 487

2. Solute strengthening theory

The theoretical framework for understanding the special role of V
is based on the fundamental interaction energy between a dislocation
and the solutes that constitute the random alloy. In the random alloy,
the random arrangement of solutes gives rise to spatially-fluctuating
total interaction energies between the dislocation and the collective
fluctuations in local solute concentrations. The dislocation becomes
pinned in regions of favorable fluctuations, and this pinning is associ-
ated with high barriers for dislocation motion. These barriers are
overcome only by high applied stresses and/or high temperatures. A
new general theory for the strength of random alloys based on the
motion of edge dislocations through the random alloy, and encom-
passing both fcc and bcc crystal structures and for arbitrary number
of components and arbitrary composition, embodies the physics of
the problem [11,12]. The full theory for the finite-T, finite-strain-rate
initial yield strength of an alloy can be reduced to an approximate
analytical model under the assumption that the solute/dislocation
interaction energy U" of a type-n solute is governed by elasticity the-
ory, i.e, U" =—pAV,, where AV, is the misfit volume of the type-n
solute (n= 1,...,N) in a N-component alloy and p is the pressure
field generated by the dislocation at the solute position. The theory
then predicts the zero-temperature shear yield stress Tyo and the
energy barrier AE, for thermally activated flow as

4 2
1+ Valloy | a Paine 3

1
Tyo =A,a *LLalloy |

1— Valloy b®
; 1+ Vatiy }2[Soy¢n V2]? ”
AE, =AE@ [Latoyb? | are .
1— Valloy b

At finite temperature T and finite strain rate €, standard thermal acti-
vation theory then leads to the predicted tensile yield stress as

oy(T, €) = 3.06 Tyo [- (ae n®) ] . (2)

Here, €) = 10* s” is a reference strain rate and 3.06 is the Taylor fac-
tor for isotropic fcc and bcc polycrystals strengths controlled by edge
dislocations. The quantities Panoy and Vajoy are the shear modulus
and Poisson’s ratio of the alloy and w = 0.125 (fcc) or 0.0833 (bcc) is
related to the edge dislocation line tension as I’ = a1 4.yb?. For fcc
elastically anisotropic materials, the best estimates for Manoy and
Valloy are the Voigt averages [17], with the shear modulus in the line
tension expression the value for the glide plane/direction of the dislo-
cations. Often, however, only the isotropic polycrystalline moduli are
available from experiments which leads to some underestimate of
the strength.

The prefactor coefficients (A,,Ag) emerge from the reduced
elasticity theory that depends only on the solute misfit volumes
and the dislocation pressure field. These two material properties
emerge as separated in the theory. The pressure field then depends
only on the alloy elastic constants and dislocation core structure
(distribution of Burgers vector), and so the coefficients (A;,Ag)
depend only on these properties. Calculations [11,12] of the typi-
cal atomistic structures of the (dissociated) fcc edge dislocation
and the (undissociated) bcc edge dislocation lead to accurate alloy-
independent prefactors (A;, Ag) = (0.01785, 1.5618) for fcc alloys
and (A;, Az) = (0.040, 2.00) for bcc alloys, reflecting the different
atomic structures of fcc and bcc edge dislocations. The details of
full and reduced theory can be found in Ref. [11] for fcc alloys and
Ref. [12] for bcc alloys.

The theory demonstrates that the solute misfit volumes control
strengthening because the alloy elastic moduli vary more slowly
with composition. The misfit volumes AV, of each type-n element
(n=1,...,N) in N-component random alloys at composition {c,} can
be calculated as

aVall N dV ali
AVy = — 5 Gn 3
"8th A Cm” (3)

 

with alloy atomic volume Vajoy = Vatoy(C1,C2,--.,Cn1) and
AVanoy/Cn = O [18]. Therefore, the misfit volumes can be (i) mea-
sured experimentally [18], (ii) sometimes computed accurately
by first-principles methods [14], or (iii) estimated. A widely-used
approximation is Vegard’s law Vajioy = SonCnVn, leading to misfit
volumes AV, = Vn—Vatloy Where V, is the apparent volume of
type-n element in the given crystal structure.

It is important to note several misconceptions related to the
determination of misfit volumes that have arisen specifically in the
study of V-containing alloys of interest here. First, the apparent vol-
ume of a solute is not the local Voronoi-volume around the solute in
the lattice. The misfit volume involves distortions that extend to
near-neighbor atoms and beyond, and the formal definition above
(Eq. 3) encompasses all possible situations without the need to iden-
tify local atomic-scale details. Second, the misfit volume of a solute
must be calculated in the alloy itself, or in an appropriate surrogate
alloy having the same solute concentration. A misfit volume com-
puted in a surrogate alloy in the dilute solute limit may be quite inac-
curate because Vegard’s law does not always hold with sufficient
accuracy. Below, we will show the errors caused by these estimates
of misfit volume in the case of V.

With this broad background, we can now proceed to understand
why the unique role of V for strengthening in both fcc and bcc HEAs
is due to its atomic volume.

3. Results
3.1. Application of theory to fcc HEAs

We first consider the fcc Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni-V family of HEAs, i.e.,
adding V to the well-established Cantor alloy family. We have com-
puted the atomic volume of fcc V as 13.914 A? using first-principles
spin-polarized DFT as implemented in vasp [19], where PBE [20] is
used as the exchange-correlation functional and the PAW [21] pseu-
dopotential includes V (3s, 3p, 4s, 3d) as the valence states. (Detailed
DFT parameters can be found in Ref. [14].) As shown in Table 1, this
atomic volume is far larger than the apparent atomic volumes of the
elements Ni, Co, Cr, Fe, and Mn as previously deduced from experi-
ments on Ni, Ni-Co, Ni-Cr, and Ni-Fe binary alloys, and from Mn addi-
tions to various Co-Cr-Fe-Ni medium-entropy alloys [11]. To verify
that the V atomic volume translates into a large misfit volume in
Co-Cr-Fe-Mn-Ni-V alloys, we have also performed DFT calculations to
compute the misfit volumes in random Ni2V. In the DFT calculations,
we compute the alloy atomic volumes of Ni-V alloys around the cen-
tral composition, where cy; spans from 0.630 to 0.704. Then linear
regression is performed to the DFT-computed alloy atomic volumes,
which gives Vajjoy=13.537—2.880cy;_ with R* — 0.997. This result
then provides the DFT lattice constant of NixV (a=3.595 A,
Valoy = 11.617 A?) and, more importantly, the misfit volumes AVyj =
—0.960 A? and AVy = 1.920 A®. To remain consistent with the appar-
ent volume of Ni (10.94 A?), the corresponding apparent volume of V
is determined as 13.8 A’, in good agreement with the elemental fcc V
volume. Therefore, when V is added to alloys in the Cantor alloy fam-
ily, the large misfit of V is predicted to generate a high strengthening
relative to all other alloying elements in this family, in spite of the
fact that V leads to a small reduction in elastic modulus.

Applying the incorrect Voronoi method to NizV would yield an
apparent V volume of 11.8 A?. This value is very close to the litera-
ture DFT Voronoi volume for NiCoV [5], but is, unfortunately, signif-
icantly smaller than the accurate value 13.8 A? derived here (Eq. 3).
Other very recent literature [22] reports the apparent volume of V
as 12.23 A?. However, this value was computed for V in Ni in the
488 B. Yin et al. / Acta Materialia 188 (2020) 486—491

 

Expt.

0.6- @ Theory (Eqs. 1, 2) } alloys without Vanadium 7
© refined theory
moet. } alloys with Vanadium

0.5 @ Theory (Eqs. 1, 2) y 4

S
ns
T

0.1 5

 

 

   

 

Yield strength (GPa)
S S
oO N we
®@
x A oo
ESS

 

Fig. 1. Yield strength of various fcc HEAs with (red) and without (blue) Vanadium, at
room temperature and loading rate of 10° s7, as measured (bars) and as predicted
(symbols) by the isotropic theory (Eqs. (1) and (2)). The atomic volume of V as deter-
mined from Ni2V is used in all V-containing alloys. The refined theory prediction of
NiCoCr is based on anisotropic elasticity and the experimentally measured misfit vol-
umes. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)

dilute limit (one V atom in a large cell). Our own calculations yield-
ing 12.20 A? confirm this dilute-limit value, but it differs signifi-
cantly from the value at more appropriate concentrations, e.g., 13.8
A? as computed here from Ni2V.

Fig. 1 shows the experimental and predicted strengths of various
alloys in the Co-Cr-Ni-V sub-family. Comparisons are made after sub-
tracting the so-called Hall-Petch grain-size-dependent strengthening
to reveal only the intrinsic “chemical” strength predicted by the the-
ory. We use the analytic model of Eqs. (1) and (2) with Vegard’s law,
the atomic volumes in Table 1, and the experimental polycrystalline
isotropic elastic constants. (See Appendix A for detailed materials
parameters.) NiCo has near-zero misfit and near-zero strength rela-
tive to pure Ni. Literature results on binary Ni-Cr at large grain
size [23] lead to an estimated strength for NizCr of ~ 150 MPa while
the theory predicts 144 MPa. NiCoCr has received considerable atten-
tion due to its high strength and exceptional fracture toughness
among the Cantor alloy subsystems with equi-composition and fcc
single-phase. The experimental values from recent single crystal
data [24], multiplied by 3.06 for comparisons to polycrystal data, and
various extrapolations from finite grain size polycrystalline

Table 1

Apparent volumes of each element in fcc HEAs. The apparent
volume of V is obtained from DFT calculations of fcc V and fcc
NizV. Other values were deduced from experiments on Ni, Ni-
Co, Ni-Cr, and Ni-Fe binary alloys, and from Mn additions to
various Co-Cr-Fe-Ni alloys.

fcc apparent volumes V,, (A?)

 

V 13.914 (from DFT of fcc V)
13.8 (from DFT of Ni2V, used in prediction)

Cr 12.27°

Mn 12.60°

Fe 12.09°

Co 11.12?

Ni 10.94°

2 Ref. [11].

data [18,25] are in the range 150—210 MPa. The predicted strength
using Eqs. (1) and (2) is 128 MPa but an improved prediction using
anisotropic elasticity for this fairly anisotropic alloy and the experi-
mentally-measured misfit volumes in NiCoCr predicts 195 MPa [18].

Overwhelmingly stronger are the NiCoV [5] and Nigp¢32Vo.368 [9]
alloys recently been fabricated and tested. For NiCoV, we use the
reported isotropic elastic constants 4 = 72 GPa, v = 0.334 and pre-
dict the yield stress at T = 300 K and € = 10° s" to be 399 MPa. This
is in excellent agreement with the experimental value of 383 MPa
obtained by extrapolating finite grain size data to infinite grain size.
The theory then further indicates that the Ni-V binary alloys will be
the strongest, because the binary uses only the smallest (Ni) and
largest (V) elements. Because the prediction also depends on the
dislocation Burgers vector b = a/V2 related to the alloy lattice con-
stant a and the alloy elastic moduli, the optimal Ni-V binary alloy
favors compositions below the equi-composition alloy. Using the
theory of Eqs. (1) and (2), we predict the strength of Nig ¢632Vo.368 to
be 433 MPa. The reported yield strength of Nip. ¢32Vo.368 at grain size
8.1 wm is 750 MPa [9]. Using the Hall-Petch slope of NiCoV
(864 MPa - wm!) [5], the yield strength of Nio,¢32Vo.36s at infinite
grain size is estimated as ~ 450 MPa. This is again in good agree-
ment with the theory. The theory predicts that no higher intrinsic
yield strengths can be obtained across the entire family of Co-Cr-Fe-
Mn-Ni-V alloys, and none have been reported to date.

To show the role of V more broadly, we examine another V-con-
taining alloy recently fabricated and tested [26]. The alloy composition
is CO49Cr15Fe35MnsNiz5Vi9, which is near the widely-studied equi-
composition CoCrFeNi and Cantor alloys but with a relatively small
addition of V. The yield strength for this alloy at a very small grain size
of 5.2 jm was measured to be 498 MPa. Extrapolating to infinite grain
size using the average scaling for the closely-related CoCrFeNi
(860 MPa - jm!) (27] and Cantor alloy (494 MPa - jum!) [28] leads
to an intrinsic strength of ~ 200 MPa. Application of the theory (Eq. 1
and 2) using the elastic moduli of the CoCrFeNi yields 199 MPa, as
shown in Fig. 1. We predict that the same alloy without V, i.e., increas-
ing all other components by 2 at.% for a composition Co,2Cry7.
Fe37Mn7Ni,7 and with no change in elastic constants, would have a
strength of only 113 MPa. By extrapolating to the infinite grain size,
the experimental yield strength for the V-free CoCrFeNi and Cantor
alloys are also only ~ 100 MPa [27] and ~ 125 MPa [28], respectively,
with predicted strengths of 107 MPa and 111 MPa (see Fig. 1). Thus,
again, V addition, even at a smaller (but non-dilute) concentration of
10 at.%, provides a large ( ~ 76%) increase in strengthening relative to
the V-free counterparts, and the theory predicts this strengthening.

3.2. Application of theory to bcc HEAs

Turning to the bcc alloys, the atomic volumes of the bcc elements
Cr, Mo, Nb, Ta, V, W have been measured experimentally [29], as
shown in Table 2. Experimental studies of the lattice constants of var-
ious HEA alloys composed of these elements plus alloys containing Hf
enable the estimation of Hf apparent volume based on Vegard’s
law [30]. For Ti and Zr, which exist in the bcc structure only at high
temperatures, extrapolations are carried out to estimate the apparent
volumes at room temperature [31,32]. Here, V stands out as the sec-
ond-smallest element, with only Cr being smaller. However, Cr is
smaller than V in both fcc and bcc and so although Cr can be potent
for bcc alloys it is not nearly as effective as V in fcc alloys (see Fig. 1).
Furthermore, fabrication of single-phase random bcc alloys contain-
ing Cr can be challenging due to the strong tendency of Cr to form
embrittling intermetallic compounds. Only V is predicted to provide
substantial strengthening in both fcc and bcc alloys.

The role of V in bcc alloys is first revealed through a comparison of
the refractory alloys MoNbTaW and MoNbTaVW, which differ only by
the addition of V replacing 5 at.% of each of the other 4 elements. The
predictions of the theory and the experimental strengths versus
B. Yin et al. / Acta Materialia 188 (2020) 486—491 489

Table 2

Apparent volumes of elements in bcc HEAs. The apparent
volumes of Ti and Zr are obtained by extrapolation of high
temperature bcc data to room temperature, and that for Hf
is from Vegard’s law applied to experimental volumes of
various Hf-containing HEAs. Other values are from the
experimental lattice constants of the elements.

 

bcc apparent volumes V,, (A?)

 

 

Cr 12.321°

V 14.020°

Mo 15.524°

W 15.807°

Ti 17.387° (high T extrapolated to RT)
Nb 17.952°

Ta 17.985°

Hf 22.528 (from Vegard’s law on Hf-HEAs)
Zr 23.02‘ (high T extrapolated to RT)
2 Ref, [29].

> Ref. [31].

© Ref. [30].

4 Ref. [32].

temperature, as reported recently [12], are shown in Fig. 2. The
V-containing alloy has a significantly higher strength over the entire
temperature range. This is in spite of the fact that V has the lowest
melting point of all of these elements, and elastic moduli that are
~ 10% lower than the 4-component alloy. The role of V is thus central
to obtaining very high strength, as predicted. Many other bcc alloys
in the Mo-Nb-Ta-V-W family also have high strengths, but there are
no V-free counterparts in the literature; the theory predictions are
consistent with these high strengths [12].

Examining other bcc alloy pairs where V is added, strengthening is
found in all alloys. Fig. 2 summarizes results reported in Miracle-Sen-
kov [3], Couzinié—Miracle—Senkov—Dirras [33], Senkov et al. [34], and
Rao et al. [35]. In general, the predictions of the V-containing alloys are
in good agreement ( ~15%) with the experiments. However, our pre-
dictions for the V-free alloys can be notably lower than experiments.
One possible explanation is that there is a change from control of the

alloy strength by edge dislocations (with V) to screw dislocations
(without V) in some alloys. In addition, our predictions for MoNbTa-
TiW both without and with V are lower than experiments. This could
be attributed to the possible presence of high (1—2 at.%) interstitial
Oxygen and/or Nitrogen content, which was recently shown to
increase strength by ~ 400 MPa at 2 at.% interstitial O or N (and usu-
ally causing embrittlement, see [36]). The presence of O and N could
be particularly associated with the presence of Ti, consistent with
experimental observations of increased strength upon Ti additions in
some bcc alloys. Overall, in spite of some quantitative differences, all
of the experimental evidence on bcc alloys points to the role of V in
achieving high strength, as compared to other alloy additions. Within
the Mo-Nb-Ta-V-W family, the theory further predicts that alloys
Ta9.33V0.334xWo033-x With -0.1 <x <0.1 will have the highest intrinsic
strengths at high temperatures by taking advantage of both the large V
misfit volume and the high stiffness of W. This prediction should drive
experimental investigations of these alloys.

4. Conclusions

In summary, many new fcc and bcc high-entropy alloys have been
fabricated with V as one of many elements, and these alloys have
high strengths relative to their counterparts without V. However, the
critical role of V has not been recognized or understood. The central-
ity of solute misfit volumes, over all other material properties, is
revealed through recent theory for strengthening in these complex
random alloys. The uniqueness of V then follows from its atomic vol-
ume in fcc and bcc crystals: larger in fcc and smaller in bcc than other
HEA alloying elements, creating large misfit volume and high
strengthening in both fcc and bcc alloys. This singular feature of V
makes it the prime element for use as a strengthener in both fcc and
bcc HEAs, both as measured and as predicted by theory. While
strength is not the only application requirement, and the low-
temperature formation of Vanadium oxide may limit applications of
V-containing alloys in some situations, the general insight revealed
here, along with the theoretical models, can drive experimental alloy
design centered around V as a key elemental component.