We present an experimental approach for revealing the impact of lattice distortion on solid
solution strengthening in a series of body-centered-cubic (bcc) Al-containing, refractory high
entropy alloys (HEAs) from the Nb-Mo-Cr-Ti-Al system. By systematically varying the Nb and
Cr content, a wide range of atomic size difference as a common measure for the lattice distortion
was obtained. Single-phase, bec solid solutions were achieved by arc melting and homogeniza-
tion as well as verified by means of scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction. The
atomic radii of the alloying elements for determination of atomic size difference were
recalculated on the basis of the mean atomic radii in and the chemical compositions of the solid
solutions. Microhardness (4H) at room temperature correlates well with the deduced atomic size
difference. Nevertheless, the mechanisms of microscopic slip lead to pronounced temperature
dependence of mechanical strength. In order to account for this particular feature, we present a
combined approach, using wH, nanoindentation, and compression tests. The athermal
proportion to the yield stress of the investigated equimolar alloys is revealed. These parameters
support the universality of this aforementioned correlation. Hence, the pertinence of lattice

I. INTRODUCTION

SINCE the introduction of high entropy alloys
(HEAs),""! the focus has especially been on_ their
microstructural and mechanical properties.'! Solid solu-
tion strengthening in such chemically complex alloys is
of particular interest,'"! as these systems typically exceed
the constitutional range spanned by classical theories for
the description of solid solution strengthening in
dilute**! and more concentrated! binary alloys.
Accordingly, some efforts were made to develop models
succeeding the current state of the description of solid
solution strengthening.'”'°! The approach presented by

 

H. CHEN, A. KAUFFMANN, S. LAUBE, Y. HUANG, K.
LICHTENBERG, and M. HEILMAIER are with the Institute for
Applied Materials (IAM-WK), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
(KIT), Engelbert-Arnold-Str. 4, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany. Contact
email: hans.chen@kit.edu I.-C. CHOI and R. SCHWAIGER are with
the Institute for Applied Materials (AM-WBM), Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology (KIT), Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 1, 76344 Eggen-
stein-Leopoldshafen, Germany. F. MULLER, B. GORR, and H.-J.
CHRIST are with the Institut fiir Werkstofftechnik, Universitat
Siegen, Paul-Bonatz-Str. 9-11, 57068 Siegen, Germany.

Dedicated to Dr. Martin Palm on the occasion of his 60th birthday.

Manuscript submitted June 29, 2017.

Article published online November 13, 2017

772—VOLUME 49A, MARCH 2018

Toda-Caraballo and P.E.J. Rivera-Diaz-del-Castillo”! is
based on the theory by Labusch,!®! while it uses a
generalization of the gradual changes of the lattice
parameter and, thus, the misfit with composition in
binary solid solution towards multicomponent systems.
In contrast, Varvenne ez al.''®! presented a mechanistic,
parameter-free, and predictive theory for the yield
strength of random alloys and face-centered-cubic (fcc)
HEAs, respectively, which was validated against data
available for the CoCrFeMnNi system mainly con-
tributed by Wu e¢ al."'"! The fundamental assumption is
that dislocations move through an effective medium
having average lattice parameter, shear modulus, stack-
ing fault energy, erc.!'®! Strengthening accordingly arises
from the interaction of dislocations with random, local
concentration fluctuations around the average compo-
sition of the HEA.|'®! This especially accounts for the
fact that in the case of HEAs, solute and solvent cannot
be distinguished due to their equal concentration. In the
conclusion of Reference 10, alloys with maximized
strength can be obtained by maximizing the concentra-
tion-weighted, mean-square misfit volume or the shear
modulus. Assuming the validity of Vegard’s law and
using reasonable values for individual atomic radu, the
concentration-weighted, mean-square misfit volume,

METALLURGICAL AND MATERIALS TRANSACTIONS A
which is used in this theory, can directly be transformed
into the more common atomic size difference 6!'”!:

5= you(i-4) [1]

i

where x; is the molar fraction of the alloying element, r;
is the atomic radius of the respective alloying element,
and 7 is the average atomic radius of the alloy. An
extension of this procedure was introduced by Okamoto
et al.! by taking the individual mean-square atomic
displacements of the alloying elements into account.
They propose a linear relationship of the yield strength
and the averaged mean-square atomic displacement.

Strictly, the proposed theory by Varvenne et al.!'®!
does only apply to dislocation slip with low impact of
Peierls stress as it is observed for fcc metals and alloys.
Nevertheless, lattice distortion might significantly attri-
bute to solid solution strengthening in body-cen-
tered-cubic (bcc) HEAs as well, and the simplicity and
elegance of the atomic size difference approach make it
worthwhile testing for correlation of 6 with the plastic
yield of bcc HEAs. In this case, the contribution to solid
solution strengthening might not be driven by the
interaction of the elastic distortion field of dislocations
and the one of solute atoms but by the interaction of
dislocation cores with random, local concentration
fluctuations, as suggested by Rao et al.!'7! Deviations
from significant correlation might lead to the identifica-
tion of (1) interesting model alloys with nonequimolar
composition or (7) additional contributions by short-
range ordering!!! as well as variations of local disloca-
tion core structures!'*! specific to certain alloys.

Recently, we presented a suitable processing route for
obtaining an almost single-phase, bec HEA NbMoCr-
TiAI."*! The basic design goal was to combine elements
with high melting points (Nb, Mo) and, thus, high
intrinsic creep strength with protective oxide scale
forming elements (Cr, Al) while simultaneously reducing
density (Al, Ti) by a proper choice of elements. Arc
melting and homogenization treatment at 1300 °C for
20 hours lead to an almost single-phase microstructure
that possesses significant plasticity above 600 °C. More-
over, the formation of combined (111)-/(001)-fiber
texture components with respect to the loading axis
developed during compression testing at these temper-
atures reveals dislocation slip with (111) Burgers vec-
tors, as expected for bcc materials. The alloy exhibits a
reasonable high-temperature strength. Furthermore, the
capability of increasing oxidation resistance by adding
Cr and Al has been verified for the present and related
alloys.15-181

In general, large differences in atomic size, which are
expected for Nb-Mo-Cr-Ti-Al, as well as its ability to
deform by dislocation slip makes it a favorable model
system for studying the impact of the contribution of
lattice distortion to solid solution strengthening in bcc
HEAs. For this purpose, suitable changes in alloy
composition and the according homogenization treat-
ment for obtaining single-phase microstructure were
established and are presented in this article. In order to

METALLURGICAL AND MATERIALS TRANSACTIONS A

quantitatively describe the lattice distortion in the
present alloys, lattice parameters and, thus, interatomic
spacings were determined by means of X-ray diffraction
(XRD). These data are used to recalculate the individual
atomic radii of the alloying elements with the coordina-
tion of a bec lattice. Finally, the according atomic size
difference is correlated with mechanical properties
exhibited by the alloy series. In order to account for
the temperature-dependent strength of bec metals, a
suitable combination of microhardness (wH) for screen-
ing at room temperature (RT) as well as nanoindenta-
tion up to 400°C and compression tests for
temperatures beyond 400 °C were exemplarily con-
ducted. The relevance of the wH results at RT of the
respective alloys is stressed.

Il. EXPERIMENTAL

The alloys investigated in this work were manufac-
tured from elemental bulk material. Nb, Mo, Cr, Ti, and
Al with a purity of 99.9, 99.96, 99, 99.8, and 99.9 pct,
respectively, were mixed in the desired concentrations
and then melted under Ar atmosphere, using an AM/0.5
arc melting furnace by Edmund Bihler GmbH (Ger-
many). The furnace chamber was set to a pressure of
5 x 10-7 mbar and, alternatively, evacuated and
flooded with Ar three times before pumping to a high
vacuum of less than 1 x 10~* mbar. The Ar pressure for
arc melting was set to 600 mbar. A Zr getter was
liquefied prior to each melting step to reduce residual
oxygen content. The melted buttons were flipped and
remelted at least five times and optionally cast into a
water-cooled rod-shaped Cu mold with a diameter of
12mm and length of 60 mm. Compositions of the
equiatomic alloys in as-cast state were determined by
inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrom-
etry (ICP-OES). O and N contents were analyzed by
means of carrier gas hot extraction analysis by a TC500
device (Leco Instrumente GmbH). Depending on the
alloy composition, homogenization was performed
under Ar atmosphere in a Gero HTRH 70-600/18
resistance tube furnace for 20 hours at 1200 °C,
1300 °C, 1400 °C, and 1500 °C. For this purpose,
buttons and rods were cut into platelets with a thickness
of 5 mm. The heating and cooling rate was 4.2 K/min.
Subsequent to face grinding, XRD analyses (step width
for acquisition 0.01 deg, acquisition time of 384 s/step)
were carried out on a D2 Phaser system by Bruker
equipped with a Lynxeye line detector. The lattice
parameter was determined by extrapolating towards
0 = 90 deg using the weighting function
1 (cot? 0+ cot@- cos), according to Nelson-Riley.""”!
For microstructural investigations, the samples were
prepared by a standard metallographic procedure. After
grinding with a series of abrasive papers of decreasing
grain size, the samples were polished, etched with NH3,
H,Os;, and distilled water in a ratio of 1:1:1 at 50 °C for
5 minutes, and finalized by a vibratory polishing step for
8 hours, using a noncrystallizing oxide polishing sus-
pension with pH 9.8 supplied by Struers. Scanning

VOLUME 49A, MARCH 2018—773
electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy (EDX) analysis were performed on a Zeiss
EVOS0 system equipped with a Thermo Scientific EDX
system. For each equiatomic alloy, porosity was inves-
tigated in terms of area fraction, which was determined
from several binarized SEM micrographs. The investi-
gated area was 1.2 mm”, respectively.

Mechanical properties were characterized in terms
of yield stress and hardness. Yield stress oy during
compression tests was determined for 0.2 pct plastic
strain at elevated temperatures in a range of 400 °C to
1200 °C at an initial engineering strain rate of
10-*s~'. The samples of (3 x 3 x 4.5)mm? were
tested under vacuum in a Zwick Z100 electromechan-
ical universal testing machine equipped with a vacuum
furnace by Maytec. Strain was determined using strain
gauges attached to the samples. Vickers hardness (wH)
was investigated by a Qness QIOA+ microhardness
tester with a load of 0.98 N. Mean values and
standard deviations were obtained by analyzing 16
hardness indentations on each sample. Furthermore, a
nanoindenter G200XP by Keysight Technologies
GmbH equipped with a laser heating stage by SUR-
FACE systems + technology GmbH was used to
measure the temperature-dependent nanohardness
(nH) between RT and 400 °C at a constant indenta-
tion strain rate of 5 x 10-7 s_'. Strain-rate sensitivity

_ (dingy) _ (AmC@))  po2n (go. yi .
m= (G2) = ( Fink (oy: yield stress, é:
q é,T

strain rate, 7: temperature, nH: nanohardness, and C:
constraint factor, usually C 3°?!) was analyzed from
RT to 300°C by strain-rate jump tests with strain
rates of 5 x 10-7, 1.6 x 10°, and 5 x 10°-*s—1. Shear
modulus G of selected alloys was calculated by
G= Ls - p+ ve (p: porosity, p: density, and vy: velocity
of transverse ultrasonic waves). The experimentally
determined density p comprises an error that arises
from the sample porosity p and is corrected by the
factor = of the aforementioned equation. The density

was determined by Archimedes’ principle; vy was
analyzed by ultrasonic phase spectroscopy on cubic
samples with an edge length of 5mm within the
frequency range of 5 kHz to 10 MHz using two
identical broadband ultrasonic wave transducers
(Panametrics model V155) and a R3754A_ network
analyzer by Advantest. Reference 23 provides further
experimental details of ultrasonic phase spectroscopy.

 

 

Il. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Microstructure

Prerequisite for the accurate assessment of solid
solution strengthening is a homogenous microstructure
of the alloys under investigation. In the following, this is
exemplified with the three equimolar compositions that
were manufactured for this work. All nonequiatomic
compositions were treated in similar ways in order to
ensure homogeneity of the solid solution. The starting
point for the development was the aforementioned

774—VOLUME 49A, MARCH 2018

homogeneous, quinary, equimolar NbMoCrTiAl alloy,
which can be manufactured by arc melting and subse-
quent homogenization treatment.!'*! After heat treat-
ment of the as-cast state at 1300 °C for 20 hours, an
almost single-phase microstructure, as presented in
Figure 1(b), can be obtained for this alloy. The XRD
pattern in Figure 2(b) reveals the bcc crystal structure
(W prototype, Strukturbericht A2).

During development of this alloy, several phases
competing with the bcc solid solution were identified.
Most importantly, the formation of the hexagonal
Cr ,Nb-Laves phase (MgZn> prototype, Strukturbericht
C14) has to be suppressed to retain single-phase bcc. In
NbMoCrTiAl, the Laves phase appears for homoge-
nization heat treatments below 1300 °C as well as during
compression testing of as-homogenized material at
1200 °C. Moreover, (Mo, Nb)3Al (Cr3Si1 prototype,
Strukturbericht A15) forms during annealing at all
temperatures tested for homogenization up to now.*

 

*This phase remained unidentified in our previous investigation!“

 

Nevertheless, this phase appears only as a fringe of tiny
dimension in the vicinity of some grain boundaries. For
1300 °C and 20 hours, its volume fraction is below
0.3 vol pct in total and, thus, can be considered to be not
a relevant factor for the mechanical properties deter-
mined in this work. Some trace contents of (Al, Cr)3Ti
(Cu3Au prototype, Strukturbericht D0.) as well as B2
superstructure can occasionally be found for a variety of
processing conditions but are believed as well to be not
relevant for mechanical property determination. All
aforementioned phases were identified based on global
XRD patterns as well as locally by means of EBSD
patterns.

Since most of the competing phases are expected for
varying alloy compositions derived from NbMoCrTiAl,
only specific changes of alloying elements were con-
ducted in this research. For the suppression of Laves
phase formation, either Nb or Cr content was succes-
sively reduced toward the quaternary, equimolar alloys
NbMoTiAI and MoCrTiAl. In the case of NbMoTIiAI, a
significantly higher homogenization temperature was
needed in order to achieve a homogeneous bcc solid
solution, namely, 1500 °C for 20 hours. The according
microstructure and the XRD pattern are presented in
Figures l(a) and 2(a), respectively. In contrast, anneal-
ing at only 1200 °C for 20 hours is necessary to obtain
single-phase, bec MoCrTiAl, as shown in Figures 1I(c)
and 2(c). The concentrations of Mo, Ti, and Al were
kept constant. It was expected that increasing Mo, Ti,
and Alin Nb-Mo-Cr-Ti-Al could favor the formation of
(Mo, Nb)3Al and (Al, Cr)3Ti, while reducing the
amount of these particular elements could lead to
stabilization of Cr.Nb.

Table I summarizes all investigated alloys, their
compositions, and the necessary heat treatments to
obtain almost single-phase microstructures with residual
phases having a total volume fraction of less than
0.5 vol pct. In certain cases, higher homogenization

METALLURGICAL AND MATERIALS TRANSACTIONS A
 

Fig. 1—Microstructure of alloys with equiatomic composition in homogenized condition, obtained by SEM using BSE contrast imaging (same
magnification for all images): (a4) NbMoTiAI annealed at 1500 °C, (b) NbMoCrTiAl annealed at 1300 °C, and (c) MoCrTiAl annealed at
1200 °C, each for 20 h. Certain porosity (black features within the grains) is typical for cast material (<2 vol pct in all presented alloys) and was
randomly distributed in both as-cast (not presented in this article) and as-homogenized states.

temperatures were used as well in order to exclude
effects by the grain size of the material and possible
influences by the homogenization temperature (e.g.,
different extent of any type of ordering) on the mechan-
ical response. For NbMoCrTiAl, several batches were
tested for assessment of the reproducibility.

B. Atomic Radii of the Alloying Elements

In principle, three degrees of complication of the
description of the variation of the lattice in a HEA are
possible. The easiest assumption is that the HEA has a
defined lattice parameter without a variation on atomic
length scale at all. This assumption is physically not
meaningful and would lead to the conclusion that there
is no hardening since the solute atoms do not have a
distortion field. Further complication is possible by
assuming an effective lattice parameter of the alloy as
well as its variation caused by the individual size of the
alloying elements; this variation might be used as a

METALLURGICAL AND MATERIALS TRANSACTIONS A

measure for the lattice distortion. Even more complex is
a description where each species of alloying elements has
an average size and an according variation. In this case,
the exact size of an atom is determined by the actual
environment of the atom (not by its species alone as
assumed in the previous case). Despite the latter case
being the most realistic description and providing
several quantities for the lattice distortion, the second
assumption already allows for a possible description of
solid solution strengthening. Furthermore, the second
case is rather easy to be assessed when the atomic radii
of the alloying elements within the solid solution are
known. As pointed out by Varvenne ef ai.,''®! the
assessment of atomic size difference based on the
(tabulated) atomic radii of the pure elements might lead
to arbitrary results when the pure elements crystallize in
a different crystal structure as compared to the HEA
solid solution. In such case, the binding state of the
alloying element is different and, accordingly, a different
contribution to the lattice distortion has to be expected.

VOLUME 49A, MARCH 2018—775
In the present work, we try to obtain reasonable atomic
radii by analyzing all obtained bec alloys (coordination
number CN = 8). In the case of the crystal structure
being constant, the binding state remains rather con-
stant. Furthermore, only the refractory elements Nb and
Cr are changed in their concentrations, which should
further reduce the possibility of varying amounts of
directed binding. The situation might be different when
Al or Ti content is changed over a wide composition
range. For the analyses of the data, an overdetermined
set of equations is formulated on the basis of (1) the
chemical compositions x;; presented in Table I, where i
is the respective alloying element and j the respective
alloy; and (2) the mean atomic radius 7; in the alloys
obtained from 7; = V3/4- ape (CN = 8), where the ane
values are the lattice parameters presented in Table I,
which were determined by XRD. Moreover, the atomic
radii of the bec crystallizing elements are included in the
calculation as well (CN = 8). The overdetermined set of
equations, thus, reads

1 0 0 0 0 Nb
0 1 0 0 0 !'Nb Mo
0 0 1 0 0 Mo Ct
XNb,1 Mol %Cr,l XTi = *XAL1 Ct _— r|
XNb,2. XMo,2 XCr2  *Ti2 = *A12 rj 72
XNb,3. XMo,3. XCr3 XTi3 =X AL3 ral r3
[2]

and is solved with respect to rnp, ’Mo> l'crs “Ti, aNd ray; by
a least-squares procedure. The overdetermined set of
equations is, in principle, a multicomponent extension
of Vegard’s law. Figure 3 shows the comparison of the
atomic radii of the elements (CN = 12 for Al and Ti,
CN = 8 for Mo, Cr, and Nb as well as for an
extrapolation for Ti designated as Ti*), the mean radii

av NbMoTIAl v bcc

  
 

ia

NbMoCrTiAl

 
  
 
 

| / a.u.

MoCrTiAl
Vv

  

  

Vv

50 100
20 /°

Fig. 2—XRD patterns with logarithmic intensity scale of alloys with
equiatomic composition in homogenized condition: (a) NbMoTiAl
annealed at 1500 °C, (6) NbMoCrTiAl annealed at 1300 °C, and (c)
MoCrTiAl annealed at 1200 °C, each for 20 h. Peaks arising from
residual Cu-Kf radiation are indicated by open triangles.

776—VOLUME 49A, MARCH 2018

Composition in Atomic Percent of Solid Solutions in Annealed Condition Determined by Standard-Related EDX as well as Lattice Parameters of the Bcc Structure; O

Table I.

Contents were Exemplarily Analyzed for NbMoTiAl, NbMoCrTiAl, and MoCrTiAl: 780, 312, and 289 at. ppm, Respectively**

Xi

 

 

 

conn o@~o mm ios tt co mat \O DCO \O
—~ 7 oOo aAmnNS tat ooo
oco co S > CS occ ocoSe
g Seceoceso Sooo Secs coco
q SItltT Flt FTf+T F1F 1
YS 00 CO WD on ae +4
5 Sart Oo + tN a
3B. Aas rt ar “I
= | et ood anon an colon!
=a eo Or Ont nt Oe BR ONS oO
eeoodqogoococscoc oo
esesseseerseeeeeeeeeo
SoocooCcoooccccooass
—
SlHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
COMmONDEKErADRDOUONTE
TIHEANNDAAODADSANANNYN
ANDEAN SAA AAANaAaAG
enaoocoqoococoocoosc oo
Nmaoemme orm oon ona oOo OO
eoooscossoosooooosls
eeoscesesssesseessee [ze
coooocooocoocoooooooo] -«
oO
EJ HHHHHHHHHHHHHHH] 2
ANDOOTATDNHNNOtNHA | oO
MONAT GAODDDOOGGIHNTT I] LS
ANAAANANTAAAANAAAAAT §
eocooocooocooooooco|s
e
s
3
ase Oe ONO or OR ANON a
Soaqacoocoooescsa |3°
BAe SBS aae Ss lik
coooooosoooooolsaA
WwW
5 HHHHHHHHHHHHH |
ODH™-ONK MH ODMOr | BZ
WDDONDAADOATDHNTT 1S
SOEaGANTWAANAAAAAYN |
| l\SSSSSSSSSSdcCc 3s
2
o
ANeDtaenantosnaeasal &
SEaeoqoQoqoqgeceooooog!|s
eeseeeeeeeee2eeeeePe]s
o}/erecoescsooooooooscse x
?
S|HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHIS
WDANOMNAAKENHNANWMAIMSTt |! GY
FINANDOADSHMNATHNN ]/ &
ANANANNNANTTWAAANAAYN IS
Soeooconmncoocoococcoocosa |S
Ww
&
a
g
esooosooooosso
essssseeeeeeee °
o}occscscsoscscsescsscs 8
ZIHHHHHHHHHHHHH 2
ANAT HTHTADNOMNNONM ;o
MOND ANNAHORGTO ©
ANANANAAAATI ITS s
SsScoScScSoSoSoScSS SG | | ie
2
2
s 3
LL 5
3 % % % x % Ox x x %
3 SSE eoeeeeeeeeaeagsa 5
Sicgoooqgcoocaococoqcos | =
8 ANAAAAAAAAANAAAA S
Bea Nan hee Be Ne Be Me > We Me Seat |S
wl/VUVVOVVVVVVVVVY
¢ o Oo 0 O09 0 0 0 O09 O09 0 0 O09 O09 0 O Z,
=locoocooocooooooocooool:
slieosoosocoososososooosososSssS .
OLFAAMFAMNMAAMNMAAEMAM Jed
Sg ee et re
5
iQ
g
5
=
3
qd o
g s
2] ¢2 2 222 (|€
g ES a ES E a
aad a)
Pl, Be SS 8h 8 g
Elf ss se SO Sa [8
sa a
OJ/E OO VY So Se =
S/F Zz Ze sce 35¥ Q
Ss /9 O09 9, OOo GO a
El|Z ZZ ZZ ZZ Ze 5
° a
Zz 3
oO
n
=)
*
slo Non tw oO 00

 

METALLURGICAL AND MATERIALS TRANSACTIONS A
1.5

oO

CC

 

exper. & liter. data
recalculated radii

a

yy
av

14 OW

< WN Vine

= VY 7 AD Wei

EAA A CAA aaa a aa
AAAA CAA adaaadaag
Jw VB
AAAA CE AaaAaadaaag
JOO CU
Www Baa

MIAAAAAAAAAAAAA AG
Fee ie ea

Fig. 3—Comparison of experimental and recalculated atomic radii in the elements 7; as well as investigated alloys 7;. Literature data for Al, Ti
(using CN = 12, respectively), Nb, Mo, and Cr (using CN = 8), represented by solid bars, are all taken from Ref. [25]. ““Ti*” designates an
extrapolation of the atomic radius of bcc Ti corrected by thermal expansion down to RT (CN = 8) according to Ref. [24].

in the alloys deduced from the bec lattice parameter
(CN = 8), and the values obtained from solving the
aforementioned overdetermined set of equations. Since
Ti exhibits a bcc high-temperature modification, a
second atomic radius for Ti based on the lattice
parameter of the high-temperature bcc phase
(CN = 8) and compensated by thermal expansion
down to RT taken from Reference 24 is included as a
reference. It is obvious that the atomic radii of all
elements that are deduced from non-bcc crystal struc-
tures, namely, Al and Ti, are quite different from the
recalculated atomic radii, whereas the radii of the bec
elements are well reflected by this approach. Good
agreement of the recalculated atomic radii with the
experimentally observed mean atomic radii in the alloys
of the present contribution is found. It is pointed out
that the error indication for the experimental mean
atomic radii is conservatively chosen (taking the peak
width into account) in all cases and might be signifi-
cantly smaller in reality. Thus, the description of alloys
within the Nb-Mo-Cr-Ti-Al system on the basis of
tno = 1.4297 A, ro = 1.3627 A,, rey = 1.2488 A,
ry, = 1.4474 A, and ra; = 1.3172 A is rather good
and the linearity by Vegard’s law seems to be reason-
able—at least for variations of the Cr and Nb concen-
tration. Further details of the binding states in such
alloys have to be investigated in the future, especially
with respect to individual variation of the radii of the
elements, which will not be considered for the further
course of this article. Also, the actual misfit volume was
not experimentally determined within this work but
would describe the extent of lattice distortion in an even
more accurate way.

METALLURGICAL AND MATERIALS TRANSACTIONS A

C. Temperature-Dependent Mechanical Properties

Depending on the homologous temperature, bcc
metals and substitutional solid solutions exhibit an
intrinsic temperature-dependent yield stress that can be
divided into a low-temperature, a plateau, and a
high-temperature regime, as exemplarily shown for
Fe-3 wt pct Siin References 26 and 27. This is schemat-
ically presented in Figure 4(a). At low temperatures,
plastic deformation of bec metals and alloys is thought
to be mediated by the thermally activated formation and
movement of kink pairs. The movement of kink pairs
itself can be controlled by (1) either line tension when
the critical kink width is very small and of the order of
the dimension of the dislocation cores or the distance
between minima in the Peierls potential or (2) by the
elastic interaction of the kinks when the kink width is
necessarily high.?*! Consequently, strength increases
considerably with (1) decreasing temperature and (2)
increasing strain rate. Above a certain temperature,
usually referred to as ‘critical temperature”?! or ‘knee
temperature,””'*! a strength plateau is reached. In this
temperature regime, strength becomes virtually strain-
rate independent. The knee temperatures of the bcc
principal elements of the present HEA system are about
130 °C for Nb, 275 °C for Mo, and 300 °C for Cr,?!3
For the investigated alloys, a similar temperature range
for the knee temperature is expected. When exceeding
about 0.4:-7;, (Tim: melting temperature), diffusional
processes lead to rapid decrease of the yield stress.
Mechanical strength becomes strain-rate dependent
again. Thus, for the assessment of solid solution
strengthening in bec alloys, the strain-rate independent

VOLUME 49A, MARCH 2018—777
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a)
109; 25. 107s" HH nH Pio
[ -O- NbMoCrriAl
wth |B: - ®@ -O- MocrTial
64 84 “Soc A -A- NbMoTiAl +8
“Orne 4 Vv -v- Cr ©
© mM ane ia aie be
oa ® «| SASS Peon oO
ao 674A a <Son0 6
§ [gop Png gfe 8
- = A A 5
% rT 44 14 8
4 co | :
24 = ©
yo QAM Sees, r2
| claim Vo VV
o+— 0S _ > — 0
100 200 300 400
T/°C
(b)
1500+ 15004 =10%s" 9,
-M- NbMoCrrial
-@©-  MoCrTiAl
-A-  NbMoTIAl

 

 

 

 

—T y T y T r T y 1
400 600 800 1000 1200
T/°C

(c)

Fig. 4—(a) Scheme of the temperature-dependent yield stress of bec
metals and alloys. Experimental results for the temperature depen-
dence of the equiatomic alloys MoCrTiAl, NbMoTiAl, and
NbMoCrTiAl; (b) microhardness wH®™ was obtained at RT. Multi-
ple data points represent wH®" obtained for varying homogenization
parameters and on different batches (Table I). Nanohardness nH
was determined between RT and 400 °C in order to obtain the pla-
teau nanohardness nH?'***" = nH(400 °C). (c) Compression tests
were performed at a consistent strain rate of 10-*s~' between
400 °C and 1200 °C depending on the macroscopic ductility of the
polycrystalline material in order to obtain the plateau yield stress
oblateau equal to ooore (NbMoCrTiAl, NbMoTiAl) and ayo’
(MoCrTiAl). The connecting lines are to guide the eyes. Error bars
that do not exceed the symbol size are omitted.

plateau strength, frequently referred to as athermal
strength, ideally should be investigated.

In order to account for temperature dependence of
the mechanical properties, several mechanical tests were
performed and are summarized in Figures 4(b) and (c),
respectively. Compression tests performed from 400 °C

778—VOLUME 49A, MARCH 2018

 

Fig. 5—Secondary electron contrast image of a Vickers indent (lower
right corner) in NbMoCrp.sTiAl at RT, revealing slip traces in vari-
ous directions in the vicinity of the indent; slip traces are highlighted
by black arrows.

to 1200 °C on the equiatomic alloys in Figure 4(c) reveal
the transition from plateau-like yield stress to creep-con-
trolled strength. As shown in previous investigations,
the predominant deformation mechanism in NbMoCr-
TiAI is dislocation slip up to a deformation temperature
of 1200 °C.""*! Hence, this quinary alloy and its deriva-
tives are well suited to discuss the temperature-depen-
dent yield stress, also in the creep regime. Onset of the
drop of strength is observed between 600 °C (MoCr-
TiAl) and 1000 °C (NbMoCrTiAl).

Due to microstructural features, NoMoCrTiAl and its
derivatives do not reveal significant plasticity on a
macroscopic scale at temperatures lower than 600 °C
(NbMoTiAl, NbMoCrTiAl) and 400 °C (MoCrTiAl).
As shown in Figure 1 and discussed in Reference 14,
abnormal grain growth appears during homogenization,
which might lead to increasing compatibility stresses
between these large grains and the surrounding
microstructure during compression testing. This is a
possible reason for a limited ductility of the presented
alloys. In addition, pores within the compression sam-
ples, developed during solidification after casting, fur-
ther lead to an increase of internal stresses due to
localization. Thus, crack formation is _ initiated,
although, macroscopically, yield stress has not been
reached. Nevertheless, wH and nanoindentation reveal
plasticity (without cracking) on a local scale. Figure 5
exemplarily shows slip traces of NbMoCro sTiAl in the
vicinity of a wH indent at RT.

By using nanoindentation, a temperature range
between RT and 400 °C could be covered in order to
reveal the plateau region of the yield stress in
Figure 4(b). Further details about the temperature-de-
pendent nH of pure Cr can be found elsewhere.”"! It has
to be taken into account that indentation tests are
typically affected by varying work-hardening behavior
due to higher plastic strains when compared to uniaxial
tests for yield stress determination. Typically, hardness

METALLURGICAL AND MATERIALS TRANSACTIONS A
O pH®"/ GPa

 

 

 

 

x
~
“©
oO
SCS We PP PS ae «s ae ae ae
s ge or ge a Ie We? We?
PHT GH LK c% WF oF
(a)
a
3
= O
4 fz
Oo x
=
Oo
Le Fc vy & “8 “ “ ae ae ae ae ae
3 2 Cfo f SS
PP KOPF GH HS OF WF WS? WO?
we s ww Ws™ WP? woo?
7 8 7
© QO ae [
2 as
= 5 oO +5
L A
os U7
=
O 3 “ +3
yH® = 1.52 GPa + 101.56 GPa - 5
R2, = 0.98

 

 

Fig. 6—(a) Assessment of atomic size r and atomic size difference 6
using recalculated radii (lower part of the figure) as well as of micro-
hardness at RT wH®? and plateau yield stress gblateau (upper part of
the figure). Multiple microstructural conditions (higher homogeniza-
tion temperature, different batches) for various alloys are included
here and do not reveal significant variation. (b) Correlation of 6/
wH®T and according element/alloy composition. (c) wH®' evolution
with respect to 6 reveals linear correlation with pH®' =
1.52 GPa + 101.56 GPa-d and R2,, = 0.98. (d) Correlation of 6 and
oPlateau ag well as nH?!" from F: igs. 4(b) and (c), respectively. For
all diagrams, error bars that do not exceed the symbol size are omit-
ted. Color coding is consistent for all diagrams.

determined with a Berkovich indenter cerns pads toa
yield stress at about 7 pet plastic strain.??! Hence,
contribution of work hardening to strengthening that
occurs from indentation eventually varies with alloy
composition. Further alloy development with respect to

METALLURGICAL AND MATERIALS TRANSACTIONS A

+ 1000

T
o

HOH
7
LL

nH?" 7 GPa
lateau / MPa

O 8/%

+ 500 “oO”

O
<j

 

 

 

T T T T T T T T T T T T
so < oO ANS ae ww pds ae
» DM KR KP KP «”

© O S O
we ge ge HRs S OX WP yO
ws WW WK o® WP? wo?

(d)
Fig. 6—continued.

ductility might provide chances to assess this in the
plateau temperature range. In agreement with the
observations from compression testing, the nH data
indicate a plateau of the mechanical strength at tem-
peratures higher than approximately 300 °C for the
quaternary and quinary alloys. The temperature-depen-
dent strain-rate sensitivity was exemplarily investigated
for NbMoCrTiAl in order to verify that the plateau
hardness is indeed achieved.

Compared to the rate-sensitive deformation behavior
of pure bec-structured elements in the low-temperature
regime, such as Cr with a strain-rate sensitivity of about
m®? = 0.087!7°! at RT, NbMoCrTiAl shows an
already, comparably low m®? = 0.018 + 0.004 at RT.
Nevertheless, as is in the case of pure Cr,?!?9! the
strain-rate sensitivity of NbMoCrTiAl almost vanishes
when approaching the knee temperature:
m° °© = 0.007 + 0.003. Thus, clearly, the plateau
strength oPlateau is reached in the temperature range
between 300 °C and 600 °C in NbMoCrTiAl. This is in
agreement with our observations by compression tests at
elevated temperatures. In accordance, the chosen values
for nH?!" and gPlateau are included as separate charts
in Figures 4(b) and (c), respectively.

The assessment of solid solution strengthening in the
last part of the present article will be mainly based on wH
measurements at RT yH*" due to their simplicity and
reproducibility. wH®" does not significantly depend on
alloy batch or varying homogenization parameters. Hence,
it is independent of grain size and orientation and RT
hardness is reproducible. As shown in Figure 4(b),
strength and hardness at RT are already influenced by
the thermally activated slip processes. Nevertheless, micro-
hardness wH®' at RT, on the one hand, and nH?"**" as
well as gPlateau on the other hand, exhibit a very reasonable
correlation (compare Figures 4(b) and (c)).

D. Assessment of Solid Solution Strengthening

By using the atomic radii presented in Figure 3, the
atomic size difference 6 was calculated. While the mean
atomic radius, calculated from the lattice parameters
presented in Table I, monotonically decreases with
increasing Cr content from NbMoTIiAI to NbMoCrTiAl

VOLUME 49A, MARCH 2018—779
 

Table II. Relevant Materials Properties for the Evaluation of Composition-Depending Shear Modulus G

J Nominal Composition Annealing Condition Porosity p (kg/m?) vy (m/s) G (GPa)

1 NbMoTiAl 1500 °C, 20 h 0.0078 + 0.0018 6637 + 2 2940 + 15 57.8 + 2.2
5 NbMoCrTiAl 1300 °C, 20 h 0.0116 + 0.0027 6594 + 5 3150 + 18 66.2 + 1.0
6 Nbo.75MoCrTiAl 1300 °C, 20 h 0.0127 + 0.0110 6501 + 46 2990 + 2 58.9 + 2.5
o Nbo.sMoCrTiAl 1300 °C, 20 h 0.0083 + 0.0025 6420 + 16 3130 + 1 63.4 + 3.4
8 Nbo..25MoCrTiAl 1300 °C, 20 h 0.0080 + 0.0045 6245 + 40 2880 + 1 52.2 + 1.0
9 MoCrTiAl 1200 °C, 20 h 0.014 + 0.0070 6165 + 57 2927 + 29 53.6 + 0.5

and further decreases by decreasing the Nb content from
NbMoCrTiAl to MoCrTiAl, the atomic size difference
exhibits a different trend. Figure 6(a) shows that for
alloys between NbMoTiAl and NbMoCrTiAl, a mono-
tonic increase of 6 is observed, while it is almost constant
for alloys between NbMoCrTiAl and MoCrTiAl. This is
caused by the significant difference of the size of Cr
compared to the average atomic size of the alloy, while Nb
exhibits a size similar to mean atomic radii of the prepared
alloys and, thus, provides negligible potential for addi-
tional lattice distortion. Nevertheless, all presented alloys
based on Nb-Mo-Cr-Ti-Al exhibit a 6 ranging from 3.25
to 5.15 pet. Thus, a significant variation of lattice
distortion for investigating solid solution strengthening
is provided. For reference, Cr, Mo, and Nb without any
lattice distortion are investigated, too.

For the assessment of the effect of 6 on the mechanical
properties, wH at RT pwH®’ and plateau yield stress
oPlateau are plotted in a unified way in Figure 6(a).
Varying homogenization treatments as well as varying
alloy batches (different data points in Figure 6(a);
Table I provides details) do not s ignificantly alter the
LH of the alloys. For reference, wH™” values of Nb, Cr,
and Mo are presented as well. Indeed, atomic size
difference and wH seem to correlate. In the case of the
alloy series ranging from NbMoCrTiAl to MoCrTiAl,
where constant mechanical strength should be expected,
an excess hardness of about 0.8 to 0.9 GPa above the
average WH of NbMoCrTiAl to MoCrTiAl of 6.3 GPa
is observed. Staying approximately constant from
NbMoTiAl over NbMoCrTiAl towards MoCrTiAl,
the gradual change of lattice parameter with composi-

tion 7 in , serving as a classical measure for the extent of

lattice distortion in binary alloys,'*! apparently does not
reflect the present evolution of nH.

Figure 6(b) presents the determined correlation of
wHET = 1.52 GPa + 101.56 GPa'd with Riy = 0.98.

** As pointed out in Section HI, wH®" is altened by a

ER ai =l1- Cote is a modified coefficient of determination
R taking the degrees of fréedom & and the number of data points for
data fitting n into account. The coefficient of determination R? corre-
sponds to the ratio of the covariance and the product of the standard
deviations of the fitted data.

possibly different hardness increase due to thermally
activated slip among the alloy series. For this reason,
Figure 6(c) exemplarily incorporates the plateau values
for nanohardness nH?!*"*" as well as yield stress gute

780—VOLUME 49A, MARCH 2018

for the quaternary and quinary alloys. Even then, a
reasonable correlation of 6 and mechanical strength is
observed for the present HEA system.

As already mentioned, the hardness of Nb,MoCrTiAl
alloys with x = 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75 with almost constant
atomic size difference apparently exceeds the average
hardness of NbMoCrTiAl and MoCrTiAl. In addition
to the severely distorted lattice as a major contribution
to solid solution strengthening, additional factors might
cause the exceeding wH of Nbo2sMoCrTiAl,
Nbo.sMoCrTiAl, and especially Nbo.7sMoCrTiAl.

A change in shear modulus, which correlates with the
line energy of dislocations, could influence dislocation
motion. The most obvious deviations from the correla-
tion of wH®" and 6 are observed for the alloys with
almost constant atomic size difference. Thus, the shear
modulus G was determined for Nb,MoCrTiAl with

= 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1 and NbMoTIAI also in
order to cover the entire composition range of the
investigated alloys (Table II). Shear moduli exhibit only
minor changes from about 52 GPa to about 66 GPa and
do not seem to provide a correlation with the observed
RT microhardness wH®*. Hence, we assume that within
the Nb-Mo-Cr-Ti-Al system with varying Cr and Nb
concentration, the shear modulus does not play a major
role for solid solution strengthening. Although no global
superstructure was detected by XRD analyses, different
types of ordering might additionally strengthen some of
the alloys.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

Providing almost single-phase microstructure, dislo-
cation mediated plasticity with (111) Burgers vectors,
and varying atomic size differences between 3.25 and
5.15 pet, NbMoCrTiAl and its derivatives are very well
suited for investigating the impact of lattice distortion
on the solid solution strengthening in concentrated bec
alloys. In the present article, a correlation between the
atomic size Wifference 6 and RT microhardness wH®’,
namely, wHS* = 1.52 GPa + 101.56 GPa-6, was found
for a series of alloys Nb-Mo-Cr-Ti-Al, including two of
quaternary and one of quinary, equimolar composition.
The following conclusions can be drawn.

(1) Bcc solid solutions were stabilized by appropriate
heat treatments in all investigated alloys, and
competing phases were accordingly suppressed
when gradually reducing the concentration of Nb
and Cr.

METALLURGICAL AND MATERIALS TRANSACTIONS A
(2) Individual atomic radii of the alloying elements were
determined by evaluation of experimentally observed
mean atomic radii of all investigated alloys.

(3) Although pH®! reasonably correlates with the
atomic size difference 6, the magnitude of pH®" is
altered by the well-known feature of thermally
activated dislocation slip in bcc metals and solid
solutions. Thus, combined temperature-dependent
mechanical characterization by both nanoindenta-
tion and compression tests was used to exemplarily
assess the athermal strength of the equimolar
alloys. Both oP!" and nH?'**" further support
the correlation with 6 found for wH®".

(4) Variation of shear moduli remains small within
the composition range of the investigated alloys
and cannot account for the observed dependence
of the hardness of the alloys.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The financial support by the Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft (DFG), Grant No. HE 1872/31-1, is grate-
fully acknowledged. One of the authors (AK) thanks the
Carl Zeiss Foundation for financial support via a Post-
doctoral Grant. IC acknowledges the financial support
by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. The au-
thors acknowledge the chemical analysis by ICP-OES at
the Institute for Applied Materials TAM-AWP), Karl-
sruhe Institute of Technology (KIT). We also thank D.
Schliephake, U. Hauf, P. Eyer, F. Hinrichs, and M.
Swetik for experimental support. We thank Professor
W.A. Curtin (EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland) for fruitful
discussions and suggestions. This work was partly car-
ried out with the support of the Karlsruhe Nano Micro
Facility (KNMF, www.knmf.kit.edu), a Helmholtz Re-
search Infrastructure at Karlsruhe Institute of Technol-
ogy (KIT, www.kit.edu).

REFERENCES

1. J.-W. Yeh, S.-K. Chen, S.-J. Lin, J.-Y. Gan, T.-S. Chin, T.-T.
Shun, C.-H. Tsau, and S.-Y. Chang: Adv. Eng. Mater., 2004,
vol. 6, pp. 299-303.

METALLURGICAL AND MATERIALS TRANSACTIONS A

SIDA

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

I.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23,

24,

25,

26.
27.

28.
29,

30

. D.B. Miracle and O.N. Senkov: Acta Mater., 2017, vol. 122,
pp. 448-511.

. C. Varvenne, G.P.M. Leyson, M. Ghazisaeidi, and W.A. Curtin:

Acta Mater., 2017, vol. 124, pp. 660-83.

R.L. Fleischer: Acta Metall., 1961, vol. 9, pp. 996-1000.

R.L. Fleischer: Acta Metall., 1963, vol. 11, pp. 203-09.

R. Labusch: Phys. Status Solidi (b), 1970, vol. 41, pp. 659-69.

I. Toda-Caraballo: Scripta Mater., 2017, vol. 127, pp. 113-17.

. I. Toda-Caraballo and P.E.J. Rivera-Diaz-del-Castillo: Acta Ma-

ter., 2015, vol. 85, pp. 14-23.

N.L. Okamoto, K. Yuge, K. Tanaka, H. Inui, and E.P. George:

AIP Aady., 2016, vol. 6, p. 125008.

C. Varvenne, A. Luque, and W.A. Curtin: Acta Mater., 2016,

vol. 118, pp. 164-76.

Z. Wu, H. Bei, G.M. Pharr, and E.P. George: Acta Mater., 2014,

vol. 81, pp. 428-41.

S.I. Rao, C. Varvenne, C. Woodward, T.A. Parthasarathy, D.

Miracle, O.N. Senkov, and W.A. Curtin: Acta Mater., 2017,

vol. 125, pp. 311-20.

A. Fernandez-Caballero, J.S. Wrobel, P.M. Mummery and D.

Nguyen-Manh: arXiv preprint http://arXiv:1705.01844.

H. Chen, A. Kauffmann, B. Gorr, D. Schliephake, C. Seemiiller,

J.N. Wagner, H.-J. Christ, and M. Heilmaier: J. Alloys Compd.,

2016, vol. 661, pp. 206-15.

B. Gorr, F. Mueller, H.-J. Christ, T. Mueller, H. Chen, A.

Kauffmann, and M. Heilmaier: J. Alloys Compd., 2016, vol. 688,

pp. 468-77.

B. Gorr, F. Miller, M. Azim, H.-J. Christ, T. Miller, H. Chen, A.

Kauffmann, and M. Heilmaier: Oxid. Met., 2017, vol. 88, pp. 1-11.

B. Gorr, M. Azim, H.-J. Christ, T. Mueller, D. Schliephake, and

M. Heilmaier: J. Alloys Compd., 2015, vol. 624, pp. 270-78.

B. Gorr, M. Azim, H.-J. Christ, H. Chen, D.V. Szabo, A.

Kauffmann, and M. Heilmaier: Metall. Mater. Trans. A, 2016,

vol. 47A, pp. 961-70.

J.B. Nelson and D.P. Riley: Proc. Phys. Soc., 1945, vol. 57,

pp. 160-77.

M.J. Mayo and W.D. Nix: Acta Metall.,

pp. 2183-92.

I.-C. Choi, C. Brandl, and R. Schwaiger: Acta Mater., 2017,

vol. 140, pp. 107-15.

K.L. Johnson: Contact Mechanics, Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, 1987.

K. Lichtenberg,

Weidenmann: J. Compos.

1177/0021998317699867.

O.N. Senkov, J.M. Scott, S.V. Senkova, D.B. Miracle, and C.F.

Woodward: J. Alloys Compd., 2011, vol. 509, pp. 6043-48.

G. Chiarotti: in Structure, G. Chiarotti, ed., Springer, Berlin, 1993,

vol. 24a, pp. 21-26.

N. Zarubova: Scripta Metall., 1977, vol. 11, pp. 441-44.

N. Zarubova and B. Sestak: Phys. Status Solidi (a), 1975, vol. 30,

pp. 365-74.

A. Seeger: Z. Metallkd., 2002, vol. 93, pp. 760-77.

V. Maier, A. Hohenwarter, R. Pippan, and D. Kiener: Scripta

Mater., 2015, vol. 106, pp. 42-45.

. B. Sestak and A. Seeger: Z. Metallkd., 1978, vol. 69, pp. 195-202.

1988, vol. 36,

R. Ro6ssler and K.A.
2017, https://doi.org/10.

E. Orsolani-Uhlig,
Mater.,

VOLUME 49A, MARCH 2018—781
